Welcome back to the Java Web Fundamentals class.
My name is Kevin Jones, and this is the chapter on Asynchronous Programming.
In this chapter, we'll cover two major objectives.
We want to understand why asynchronous programming is important.
We want to understand how to write asynchronous servlets.
So, why is asynchronous programming important?
We can imagine various scenarios.
For example,
if a request comes into the servlet and the servlet
needs to access some back-end resource,
we'd like to offload that request to some thread,
maybe an I/O thread,
that can process that back-end resource without consuming the
threads that the servlet container is itself using.
So the servlet container can therefore reuse many threads.
Also if the servlet container is using threads,
for example, to push responses back to the client.
So if we have scenarios where we're using,
say, long polling for example with an AJAX client,
in that case, asynchronous servlets and asynchronous calls can help us scale.
And how do asynchronous servlets work?
So with an asynchronous servlet,
we first have to mark the servlet as being asynchronous,
and we'll see how we do that in a moment.
Once we've done that,
within the request handling code inside the servlets
we get an asynchronous context.
We then start the context to handle the request,
and this will push the request off onto a different
thread managed by the servlet container.
Once that work is done, we can then process the response,
and we can then use the context to return that response
and mark the request as being complete.
Optionally,
we can add listeners to this context to listen for specific
events around the asynchronous nature of the work.
And we'll see examples of this in the code in a moment.
So the first thing we do is mark the servlet as asynchronous,
and we do that inside the WebServlet annotation by saying asyncSupported = true.
Then within the servlet itself, in this case inside the doGet method,
we can grab the context,
and we do that on the request object by calling startAsync,
and this returns us an asyncContext object for us to use.
On that context we call start, and this starts the async work.
We pass this in this case a lambda,
and inside that lambda we can then do some work.
Here we're just simply writing out a response.
Notice we can catch exceptions in here and process those exceptions,
and then when we're done we call complete on the context,
and that tells the container we've finished and we no longer need the servlet,
we no longer need this thread, we're no longer doing any work on this context.
Alternatively,
if we don't want to deal with the processing itself within the servlet,
we can dispatch this call to some other servlet. So let's write some code and see how we do this.